[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[PIANO]
>> It's as mysterious
as it is profound.
The Emerald Tablet
is a cryptic book
of teachings considered
vital to alchemists
and searchers of truth.
Its origin dates back to
ancient Greece and Egypt.
The ancient author was as
mystifying as his teachings.
>> Hermes is an amazing
figure from the ancient past.
He's known by many, many names.
One of the most famous
names really is Thoth.
No matter where you
go on the planet,
you're going to find
that he was there.
>> The Hermetic teachings
revealed principles that were
said to hold the
keys of creation,
each of which included
a connection to sound.
The first is the
principle of mentalism
that proclaims
"The all is mind."
Another way to say it
is that the universe
is in part a mental
projection in which thoughts
create reality.
>> According to the
ancient Hermetic teachings,
every thought or emotion has
corresponding vibrations which
are reproducible
like musical notes.
We can think of emotion as
vibrating energy in motion.
Thoughts are also vibrations,
but of a faster or finer
frequency.
>> The principle of
correspondence reflects
Hermes' teaching,
"As above, so below."
>> This concept of Hermes
of as above, so below,
is pretty much what we see
around us when we think
of micro reflex
systems in my body,
and the same kind of ideas that
we see in the mathematics that
govern the structure of an atom,
that also govern a pleasing
chord on a piano, and govern
the orbital diameters of planets
in the solar system.
And now we see more
in astrophysics
that's talking
about grand patterns
in the universe itself.
>> The universe that we
inhabit is a reflective,
fractal composite happening
at many levels of magnitude.
Hermes expressed it beautifully
in the simple phrase
as above, so below, which
articulates the reality
that there is an implicate order
at higher orders of magnitude
that are more and more complex,
that reflect a very simple
and universal principle.
>> What's amazing about this is
when you look into the smallest
fractal of the smallest
part of anything,
you'll find a whole in it.
If you zoom out
from the universe,
we find that the way that
the clusters of galaxies
are all put together,
they actually
look like neurons in a brain.
And so when you
look at the brain
and you look at the
universe, we find out
that we're probably living
inside of a conscious mind.
>> There's an old Arab saying
that says that you can't look
away from the face of God.
[LAUGHS] That it's all
every place you look.
If you look at the
Tibetan Buddhist idea
where these
vibrational frequencies
at the root of all
things that all reflect
each other in every kind of
size scale or sound scale,
forms this network
connection where everything
is reflected in everything else
so completely that it really
is all just one thing.
The idea that you're over there,
I'm over here is an illusion.
[SYMPHONY MUSIC]
>> The ancient Hermeticists
considered this teaching
of as above, so below to be
one of the most important
instruments by which humanity
can perceive the mysterious.
>> When you understand
as above, so below,
you really begin to realize
that there's so much more grand
things going on out
there in the universe,
and we're actually a part of it.
We're directly connected to it.
>> The principle of vibration
states that "Nothing rests.
Everything moves.
Everything vibrates."
>> The principle has been
around for thousands of years
in different forms.
The form that it's taken in
our times is quantum mechanics.
The word quantum is
just another word
of saying quantify vibration.
So we're quantifying the
vibrations of the universe
in order to harness
them and create from.
So in our time, we've
harnessed those vibrations
and we've created all
kinds of new technologies,
all kinds of new possibilities.
The greatest scientists--
Schopenhauer, Einstein--
all of them recognized and
went to the east to study
the Vedas and their
understanding of vibration
in order to understand what
they discovered in the quantum
field.
They knew it intellectually,
but they could not
internalize the strange
vibrational behaviors
of quantum mechanics that
are really normal everywhere
in our life.
>> Our modern physicists are
now in agreement with what
our ancient mystics had said,
that everything is in a state
of vibration.
One of the latest
theories is that
of string theory,
where if you like,
there are many different
parallel dimensions that
are all vibrating slightly
differently, such as a string.
[GUITAR]
And if you pluck a string,
it'll be moving really fast.
And what's happening
is that's the strings,
the fundamental
frequency as well
is the many, many, many
multiple vibrations
that create these harmonics.
These harmonics are geometric,
mathematical multiples of it.
And this relationship
can be found
in the orbital distances
of our planets,
periodic table of elements,
botany, crystallography,
chemistry.
All adhere to the
harmonic relationships
of vibrating strings.
[GUITAR]
>> An interesting way to
visualize string theory is
to imagine a guitar string
vibrating so fast that it
appears to be solid.
This gives us a clue as to
how energy creates matter,
or the hologram of the world,
which only appears to be solid.
[DINGING]
>> There are as many aspects of
vibration, as many expressions,
as many modes, as many causes,
as many effects as there are
frequencies in the universe.
Every single mode of
vibration impacts something
in a resonant way,
and it impacts
other things in a
consonant or dissonant way.
>> The principle of vibration
says that all things both
physical and spiritual
hold a certain vibration.
[CHANTING]
Basic science
tells us that atoms
are made of constant motion,
as is the universe itself.
>> This vibration of the
structure of space were called
many things.
Mana, chi, other things.
And they were the
basis of creation,
the basis of organized matter
into more complex systems
like planets and stars
and galaxies, and so on.
And even in this more
esoteric tradition,
the event of consciousness.
So everything was really linked
to this fundamental vibration
of space.
[PEACEFUL MUSIC]
>> Light, heat, magnetism,
and electricity are forms
of vibratory motion, connected
in some way with the atmosphere
or ether.
A moving cylinder or wheel
makes a good example.
If we increase the speed
of the wheel gradually,
we can hear a growl
or a low note.
As we increase the motion,
virtually every musical note
on the scale can
eventually be heard.
The final note that's
perceptible to the human ear
is a piercing shriek
that slowly fades,
and silence follows because
the ear can no longer
hear the frequencies.
Then comes the rising
degree of heat.
After some time, the
eye sees a dark red,
which blends into
orange, then yellow,
followed by shades of green,
blue, indigo, and finally,
violet.
Then violet fades away and
all visible color frequencies
disappear.
At this point, the wheel
releases vibrations of heat
and other forms of radiation.
>> So many people in the world
believe that light and sound
are completely different
and absolutely separated.
Actually, our
scientific research
is showing that light is simply
an opposite condition of sound.
As we look at these two
different things, of light
and sound, our perception is
a completely separate thing
related to it.
What we can find
scientifically is
that both are
connected to each other
through the simplicity
of logarithmic spirals.
>> If you take a prism and
you hold it up into sunlight,
the prism breaks up the
colors of the electromagnetic
spectrum, and we can see red,
orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo, violet.
Whenever we make
or hear a sound,
we're actually hearing complex
frequencies called harmonics.
These harmonics are responsible
for the timbre or tone
color of sound,
and they literally
can be artificially refracted
or even changed with our voice.
So through the
phenomena of harmonics,
we experience the many,
many colors of sound.
>> Next is the
principle of polarity.
20th century
Hermetic philosophers
interpret it this way.
"Everything is dual.
Everything has poles.
Everything has its
pair of opposites.
Like and unlike are the same.
Opposites are
identical in nature,
but different in degree.
All paradoxes may
be reconciled."
>> Polarity is really the
principle of yin and yang
in the Chinese medicine.
It means that
opposites are similar.
You have to resolve
opposites to come to unison.
We say as above, so below
is really a plurity.
That's above.
This is below.
This is white.
This is black, and so on.
If we get too separated
with polarities,
it creates a tension
like a rubber band.
And those polarities
naturally want to resolve.
>> Living within a
harmonious universe is both
an understanding
and a projection.
Human beings have an
amazing creative potential
to create this universe
the way we want it to be
or the way we fear it to be.
That's really the polarity
that we operate within.
The vibrations that
we both interpret
and project in the
world are constantly
creating our experience of life.
So if we have certain
predisposition
of seeing the world as
a threatening place,
we are going to be creating
a fear pattern that
brings all sorts of threatening
things to us, constantly.
And we're going to be
recreating it, because we're
going to be reinforcing it.
[DRUMMING]
>> Next is the
concept of rhythm.
"Everything flows out and in.
Everything has its tides.
All things rise and fall.
The pendulum swing
manifests in everything.
The measure of the
swing to the right
is the measure of the
swing to the left.
Rhythm compensates."
>> The principle of rhythm
is basically everything is
vibrating and vibration in
and of itself is rhythmic.
It's constantly moving.
We see in ancient
times, the seated dance
of Shiva and Shakti.
It's the principle of rhythm.
[ENERGETIC MUSIC]
>> When I align myself and
sort of dance with rhythms
in the world and
couple with that,
I don't have to
make up the rhythm,
which requires extra energy.
I can dance with the rhythm
that's already aligned.
And those rhythms
are a consensus vote.
>> We live in a great ocean.
This ocean has constantly
different tides
and different movements.
The great psychiatrist
Wilhelm Reich
called it streaming and oceanic
feelings that move through one.
Emotions have rhythm.
Our voice has rhythm.
The way we relate with
different people has a rhythm.
>> When I dance with a natural
frequency, we drift together.
Everything is slightly moving
and drifting all the time.
Nothing is static.
No straight lines in nature.
>> Rhythm can have a positive
influence as well as a negative
one.
>> A rhythm can take us over.
People play the
taiko drums in Japan
and beat on them
to certain rhythms
in order to get people entrained
to that rhythm so they go out
and fight.
We played rhythms in
the American Revolution,
whether drums or flutes.
Rhythms are extremely powerful.
Sound is extremely powerful.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What if the frequency doesn't
come from a natural source?
What happens to rhythm then?
>> All electromagnetic
frequencies are essentially
vibrations.
Many of them pass through
us without causing harm,
but certain frequencies such
as X-rays or nuclear radiation
happens to be in the
bandwidth of the human DNA
and can cause mutations.
Wireless frequencies such as
radio waves and microwaves
are the bandwidth
in the human body
of the voltage-gated calcium
channels in the cells.
This can cause these channels
to open and spill calcium
into the cell, disrupting
cellular function.
>> We have a huge spectrum of
frequencies around ourselves.
So our space, filled with
different frequencies.
And we have from
very low frequency
to very high frequencies.
And never in the
history of humankind
it was a situation like this.
So we have telephones.
We have radio.
We have technical systems.
And all this has
tremendous influence to us.
>> When I have a
man-made frequency like
the electromagnetic frequencies
coming out of your wall,
60 Hertz extends six
feet out into the room.
Everything is moving, except
60 Hertz is not moving.
It's like all of a
sudden I've been tricked
into dancing with a partner
who's not dancing back,
so I'm getting drained.
I'm getting more stressed out.
And then I walk
outside and there's
5,000 radio channels and FM and
AM and shortwave one and two
and military frequencies, smart
meters, and cell phone towers.
>> Fortunately, many of these
disturbing modern inventions
can be balanced with more
advanced and beneficial
technologies.
>> Now it's a big
part of science,
of medicine to
study this effect,
understand what should be done,
and how we can prevent negative
effects.
>> We can use technology to
the rescue with sound waves
and modern medical monitors
to tell us what frequencies
balance us out, helps to size
it up until it's super strong
so it can abnormally meet the
abnormal stress of the 21st
century.
>> The next principle
is cause and effect.
"Every cause has its effect.
Every effect has its cause.
Everything happens
according to law.
Chance is but a name
for law not recognized.
There are many
planes of causation,
but nothing escapes the law."
>> We have the principles of
cause and effect in operation,
whether we like it or not.
It's called karma in the
religious or spiritual
components.
Cause and effect works
in the realm of physics.
It works in the
realm of all types
of electrochemical functions.
It works in effect
of everything.
>> The principle of
cause and effect,
meaning that if you vibrate a
certain way it's going to send
out a rhythm and a wave, we
think of that as being just
local.
And this is the
problem that we have,
that we think ourselves
as, I'm in my body.
I'm here.
I'm not over there.
But in quantum
mechanics, we know
that something could
be here and over there
simultaneously, that
I could say something
and a trillion miles away, it'll
have an effect on something
instantly.
So cause and effect
means that whatever I do
has an effect in
the entire universe.
Therefore, we work
internally to tune ourselves
to have correct action,
because that ripples out
into the universe.
And naturally, it's
like a standing wave.
It'll come back to us.
>> You can begin to see, I
actually can navigate this maze
of the universe in such a way
that I could be surfing those
waves instead of getting crushed
into the beach every time one
comes up.
It's a cause and effect type
of trial and error process
for a very, very long time.
But finally, in soul's
evolution within the body,
you're exposed to
experience after experience
after experience,
and you begin to have
some choice in the matter.
You're no longer
being tossed around
by the waves of circumstance.
You're beginning
to [INHALE] breathe
into your experience
in such a way
that you can be the
coherent force interacting
with the larger coherent field.
And that allows you to
be a creative impulse
in your own life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The spectrum of sound may
also include other traits
or energies.
Russian mystic
George Gurdjieff, who
studied Hermes and
other philosophers,
spoke of nine different
personality traits
that fit into a
geometric formation
with spiritual attributes.
>> The Enneagram is this
interesting construction
of a circle with a triangle
with a nine division circle.
And as you connect those lines
from 1 down to 4, up to 2,
it became this
mathematical sequence.
1, 4, 2, 8, 5, 7.
When you number
those nine points,
the triangle takes up
369, and the other ones
form this structure.
That related directly
to personality types.
Meaning of those numbers
related directly to their math.
For instance,
number 1, that would
be the kind of personality
that would be always first,
the explorer type.
>> The other archetypes are
the helper, the performer,
the romantic, the investigator,
the skeptic, the enthusiast,
the challenger,
and the peacemaker.
[PEACEFUL MUSIC]
Gurdjieff compared the Enneagram
to the nine-note musical scale
with two missing semitones.
On a piano, you can
see the seven notes
of the octave, the eighth being
a repetition of the first,
with missing notes at
mi, fa, and si, do,
which in total makes nine.
All of these keys and
energetic personalities
create frequencies that
impact everything around us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Another range of sounds that
play a role in the spectrum
our musical tunings.
>> Musical systems in the
Western tradition tend to be
tuned to a standardized
A equals 440 Hertz.
But that standardized musical
tuning, it's kind of arbitrary.
There were other
systems further back,
a couple hundred years ago,
Renaissance time, and so forth.
[CHEERFUL MUSIC]
You go back even further
to Gregorian time,
Gregorian chants.
[CHANTING]
Sanskrit chants.
Very, very different
musical systems were used.
[DING]
There are other systems
that are less arbitrary,
that are more aligned
with either nature
or they're more aligned with
mysticism and numerology.
[DING]
This 432 frequency is
one of the frequencies
a lot of sound healers are using
today as a more natural tuning
scale that's in harmony with
the frequencies of the universe,
the rhythms of the universe,
and especially of this world.
>> I feel that there are
no good or bad notes,
nor good or bad musical tunings.
I think of tuning like
turning the knob on a radio.
We can turn to
different stations
and get a different
set of information.
So perhaps we can
choose to tune in
to certain cosmic
frequencies that
are filled with divine,
harmonious vibrations.
[SINGING]
>> Harmonics and overtones
also come into play with
the spectrum of sound
and ancient teachings.
>> Whenever we hear an
instrument or a voice,
what we're not hearing
is a single tone.
We're actually hearing
composite frequencies
that are harmonically related.
>> [SINGING]
>> The single tone is
called the fundamental.
The overtones are called
overtones, the upper tones.
And they are
mathematically related.
Each instrument
and our voices all
produce different
harmonics that are
most stressed, most audible.
They are called formants.
And these formants are
responsible for the tone
color of sound.
[ENERGETIC MUSIC]
Every one of our voices
is unique and different
because of the formants in them.
This is as unique
as our fingerprints.
[ENERGETIC MUSIC]
>> Our voice is an
instrument that can vibrate--
>> [YELLING]
>> --polarize, create rhythm--
>> [SINGING]
--and cause action.
[SIRENS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Our emotions and the
intention of our sound can
literally affect the
tonality of our voice.
And the tonality is caused by
the harmonics in our voice.
So therefore, I think that
our emotions and our intention
or consciousness do
affect these things.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What are the lessons that
sound and this ancient wisdom
provide?
>> We're living in the
vibrational universe.
Therefore, every action we
have has a cause and effect.
As above, so below.
So it ripples out through
eight trillion octaves.
It comes back through
>> Way back several
thousand years BC,
there was a light and
sound master named Lao Tzu.
He said "From the
one, comes the two.
From the two, comes the three.
And from the three,
the 10,000 things."
So what that can be translated
as through the light
and sound principles, the one
is the universal vibration,
the sound current, the godhead.
But from a perceptual
standpoint,
you can just call it the sound
current, because we really
can tune into that.
And when we relax
and move in resonance
with that kind of a vibe, we
are resonating with the one.
>> Sound, vibration, and
understanding of frequency can
accelerate our awareness
and spiritual evolution,
because it will accelerate our
understanding of the material
world and its interaction
with information.
And the technology
that will be developed
from this understanding will
help humanity really evolve
in its understanding of
itself and its relationship
with the whole.
And that is the base
of spiritual evolution.
It is actually
understanding reality
at a deeper level, which means
that we understand ourselves
at a deeper level.
And that is the key to the
evolution of consciousness
and spiritual awareness.
>> Hermes' teachings include
another important message.
When the ears of the
student are ready to hear,
then cometh lips to
fill them with wisdom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In our next episode, Albert
Einstein claimed that we cannot
solve our problems using the
same level of thinking that
created them.
How we can expand
our consciousness
to get to the next level is up
next on "Sound of Creation."
[MUSIC PLAYING]